[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Dr. Paul Mills, PhD, is
Professor of Family Medicine
and Public Health at the
University of California San
Diego and the Director of
Research for the Chopra
Foundation.
He's published over
350 scientific papers
with a current focus on
integrative medicine.
Through his extensive
research, he's
found that true
wellness can only
be achieved by healing the whole
person, which he feels is not
being fully addressed by the
current integrative medicine
model.
Dr. Mills will share
with us why in order
to truly heal yourself, you
need to go beyond your body,
beyond your mind, and into
an experience of oneness.
Dr. Mills, thank you so
much for being here today.
>> You're welcome, Ben.
Thanks for having
me on your show.
I'm really looking forward
to our conversation.
>> So tell us just a
little bit of background.
How did you get to be the
head of the Chopra Foundation,
and just into this
work in general?
>> My background, and the focus
of my work at the University
of California San Diego, has
been historically in a field
called psychoneuroimmunology
and behavioral medicine,
and then most recently, the
integrative medicine space.
So that work that I
had been doing it UCSD
was really a perfect
match for the work
that Deepak wanted
to help advance
with the support
of his foundation,
and a lot of his
friends and colleagues
who want to help move
forward the medical model
and the wellness
model in the US.
>> So that word
psychoneuroimmunology,
what is that?
How can people
understand what that is
and the importance of it today?
>> It's very important, and
it's a field that was launched,
I'd say, in the late '70s.
And it recognizes the
very close relationship
between our psyche, both
our emotions as well
as our thoughts, and how those
influence our nervous system
and the quality of
our nervous system,
and then how the nervous
system downstream is regulating
our immunity.
So that's the psycho, the
neuro, and the immunology.
It's a very important
field relevant to pretty
much all the work
I do because it
provides mechanisms of how
what's going on up here
influences all this.
>> What would your definition
of real healing be,
if you could sum
that up somehow?
>> For me, real healing really
gets to the realm of where
a human being really knows
who and what they are beyond
their mind, beyond
their emotions,
beyond their personality, beyond
whom they believe themselves
to be.
And this starts moving into
territories typically called
self-realization in
eastern traditions,
and also in some of the more
esoteric western traditions.
>> Deepak Chopra, whose Chopra
foundation Dr. Mills heads,
has this to say about healing.
>> The word healing is actually
the same word as the word holy.
The word holy is the same
word as the word whole, whole,
wholeness.
So healing is the return
of the memory of wholeness.
You're not just a
body mind in a world.
You are the world
in a body mind.
In fact, you're
not just the world.
You're the whole
universe in a body mind.
And this is not
metaphorically speaking.
This is absolutely--
we're talking
about scientific modeling of
what we call reality, which
is still very mysterious because
atoms and molecules and force
fields and gravity
and everything
that we call reality,
these are human constructs
for modes of knowing
and experience.
And that's where the mystery is.
How do we know what we know?
>> So I'm sure, being the
head of the Chopra Foundation,
a lot of your philosophies
might align or overlap.
But would there be
anything that you
would add to that explanation?
What are your thoughts
on that explanation?
>> I concur completely.
It's really a beautiful
clip and a description.
And I remember him
giving that lecture.
That was out at Point Loma
Nazarene College in San Diego.
And it was part of a
launch of one of his books.
But really, and
particularly at the end
where he described
essentially, really,
every human being is
literally the universe,
because the
awareness that we are
is the foundation of
the universe itself.
And the path of-- we
call it spiritual growth,
it's often termed--
is one to where a person can
come into the realization
of that and live that.
And that really is the
foundation of well-being.
>> So I'm sure people at the
very precipice of this kind
of a journey into
their own self-healing,
hearing that they are
the entire universe,
could be just a little
bit overwhelming for them.
And for me, this is where
the word integrative comes in
for me.
But I would love to
hear your explanation.
What is integrative medicine,
and why that word integrative?
>> Integrative medicine,
as it's currently defined
and understood, developed
from what used to be called
complementary and
alternative medicine.
And that developed from what was
originally called whole person
medicine, which
was a movement here
in the west that also launched
in about the late '70s.
And whole person medicine
was inspired primarily
from a lot of the eastern
traditional whole person
medical systems, Ayurveda,
Tibetan medicine,
Chinese medicine, Native
American medicine.
All those traditions had an
understanding and a knowledge
of really what the human being
is beyond the body, mind,
and spirit.
And so currently
integrative medicine
is the practice of complementary
therapies such as acupuncture,
massage, osteopathic medicine,
energy medicine, such as Reiki
and healing touch, within
what's called the allopathic
or the biomedical model.
So at UCSD, for example,
where I am full time,
we have a center for
integrative medicine,
and it's throughout our
inpatient and hospital system.
And people can get not only
their traditional therapies
and surgeries, but
they can be prescribed
acupuncture and energy
medicine and on and on and on.
It's very good, it's developed,
and it's made a big difference.
But there's more to
go, is my opinion.
>> I'm sure.
It seems like it's a
fairly new approach
to take the old as well as
a lot of the new medicine
that we've, in the allopathic
model, been understanding.
So with that, what
would your definition
of integrative health then be?
>> So integrative
health, I would say,
is the next iteration
beyond integrative medicine.
So integrative health is
as a term that's come,
maybe, the last few years.
And it's getting
more into the concept
of wellness and well-being.
And it is incorporating
more completely concepts
of spiritual well-being that
the integrative medicine
model has yet to fully grasp.
And it's also doing a better
job appreciating and bringing
the whole person into
the medical system.
But integrative health also
incorporates social health,
environmental health.
And this really circles back
to these traditional health
systems, which also took
all that into account when
they were trying to get
a human being to be well
again and healthy, and live a
whole life, a productive life.
>> So the current biomedical
paradigm right now,
how would you foresee
integrative medicine,
integrative health
fitting into that?
Is there resistance to it?
Or is it kind of an open
playing field right now?
>> Both.
Historically there
was resistance.
And that's why
integrative medicine--
the modalities such as
meditation and acupuncture that
are within the
biomedical model--
they're so-called
evidence-based.
That means there's
been enough research
to show that they work, and
therefore we've allowed them
into the biomedical model.
If you didn't know, for
example, meditation.
If you went online to the
PubMed biomedical system, which
has 29 scientific publications,
there's over 5,000 studies
now on meditation,
about 4,500 on yoga,
probably 15,000 acupuncture.
So there's a lot of evidence how
these things are good for us,
and they help us reduce risk
factors and improve mood
and so forth.
So those are the
ones that end up
in the biomedical
allopathic model
because the evidence is there.
>> OK.
So it's really important
that the evidence is there.
Do you see any
preponderance of evidence
in fields that are just
being completely ignored
by the current paradigm?
>> The answer is yes,
and there's a fair amount
of evidence in the healing
touch, hands on healing model,
which is often called
biofield sciences these days.
But even though there's a
fair amount of evidence,
there still is resistance.
And I can understand why
because the western model
is very reductionistic.
You have to have evidence.
And right now there's
no scientific evidence
proving the existence of the
biofield, this field of energy
that surrounds a human being.
And we really need
that evidence.
And we have friends
who are working hard
to develop technologies that
can visualize it and show
the information in the field.
Once that's there
and developed, it's
going to be a complete game
changer on multiple levels,
not only for the
practice of medicine,
but also for us to
really appreciate
what the human being
is beyond this material
substance, and all the energy
that supports the material
body that surrounds it.
>> I guess that's really the
biggest thing that I'm noticing
today, whereas all
these technologies are
in their infancy, is the more
we come to an understanding
of what we have to take
into account for healing,
the more we're understanding
what is a human to begin with.
And there's so many
different facets to it.
So you mention the whole
person quite a bit.
How does integrative
medicine actually
take a look at what you
would call the whole person?
>> It's getting there.
So for me, as we said
earlier, the whole person
has to do with bringing
in the true understanding
of the spiritual nature, and
let's say beyond that, even
the transcendent nature.
So integrative medicine
isn't quite there yet, fully
appreciating that.
But it has pulled
in more the nature
of the mind and emotions,
which oddly enough,
and perhaps surprisingly, were
often missing historically
in the practice of medicine.
And even today, in most
biomedical systems,
people come in and you're
really primarily a symptom,
and that symptom's
being treated,
and then you're
moved on to pharmacy
and you're out the door.
And that's a very
limited perspective
on how to get a person well.
>> Now there's traditional
medical systems, Ayurveda,
traditional Chinese medicine.
In your understanding,
do these medical systems
take into account
the whole person?
>> They very much do indeed.
I'm familiar with Ayurveda
and somewhat Chinese medicine.
More so with Tibetan medicine.
My wife Tiffany and I've
been to India a few times,
Tibet a few times,
studying these systems,
speaking with other
physicians and scientists
there, learning about
their perspectives.
And those systems evolved
out of so much wisdom
beyond the medical
portion of what they do.
And the wisdom of
those systems is
referring to the transcendent
aspects, the consciousness
aspects of the human being.
That's the foundation of how
they treat the body itself,
is knowing that the body is
an expression of consciousness
itself.
>> The Gaia series "Thrive"
delved into Ayurveda,
the ancient system
of Indian healing.
So let's take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Ayurveda is a 5,000 year old
system of medicine from India.
Ayur is life and
veda is knowledge.
So it is the knowledge of life.
- Ayurveda it is not
part of a culture.
It's a universal knowledge that
enlightened sages drew through
in order to help us, in order
to help humanity with health
and happiness and wholeness.
And they were able to perceive,
with their subtle awareness,
that these elements
were actually
elements of the quantum field,
that even before creation has
manifested, there are these
primary tendencies or energies
that modern physics
is now characterizing.
- And in deep-seated
meditations,
they saw over periods of time
how these different aspects
of nature affected
different parts of our body.
They made a system of wellness,
medicine, holistic medicine,
meaning herbal medicine, and
dietary influences, things
that you can put into
the body to create
balance inside of you.
[END PLAYBACK]
>> So in these traditional
practices of medicine
and understanding
the whole person,
we just heard there meditation.
Do you practice meditation?
>> I do, yeah.
I learned when I
was in high school,
and it was really a
game changer and led me
into a whole new
direction in my life,
including how I decided
to pursue science.
But I'd like to add that
was a beautiful clip.
And what he was
saying about Ayurveda
grew out of these enlightened
sages' understanding
of the nature of
the universe itself,
consciousness itself.
And they use that to build
the knowledge about how
best to take care of this body.
That's a completely
different way
than we've had medicine
practiced in the west,
isn't it, where
we have a symptom,
and we figure something out
for that particular symptom.
But we don't know what's
going on beyond that down
to these other levels,
and particularly
the consciousness itself.
So these ancient systems
all started that way.
There's wisdom in them,
not just knowledge.
>> So would you say these
ancient medical systems are
kind of the opposite
of the reductionist?
Would you say it's the opposite?
>> Thank you.
That's perfect.
That's exactly right.
These ancient systems
were built on holism.
The current biomedical system
is based on reductionism,
as you said, which is duality.
So the basic medical
model we have
is based on kind
of a flawed premise
that the human being is
separate from the environment,
is separate from themselves,
is separate from the universe.
These traditional
systems completely
have a different knowledge,
a knowingness, actually.
It's beyond just a knowledge.
It's knowing the reality of the
oneness of this entire system
that we exist in.
>> So I want to
know, personally,
what was it that I guess
switched you on to some
of these topics that made you
want to kind of dive a little
bit deeper beneath the surface?
>> I mentioned a minute ago,
when I was in high school I
learned meditation.
At the time, what
was really big in
the US was called
transcendental meditation.
Nowadays it's more
the mindfulness.
And I really took a deep dive
into TM practice, knowledge.
I went on a lot of extended
courses, did my training.
My PhD is in neuroscience,
and I studied
neuroscience in the context
of consciousness itself.
And the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi,
who brought TM to the west,
he spoke a lot about these
ideas about the nature
of consciousness, the
potential for human beings
to develop their
consciousness, to things
such as self-realization,
the wholeness of things.
And eventually he also began to
teach and speak about Ayurveda,
which is so popular and valuable
today in our western system.
And what I wanted to
point out is that,
getting back to the
integrative idea,
so historically you had
to clip in Ayurveda.
People didn't go to an
Ayurvedic physician.
He said, go practice meditation.
He taught you meditation,
yoga, gave you certain herbs,
gave you knowledge, mantras
about your consciousness.
It was all done in an
integrated, whole person,
holism package.
But when these techniques
came to us in the west,
they were in the
reductionist model.
I will learn meditation, and
that's all I'm going to do.
Or I'm going to learn
yoga or breathing
techniques, et cetera.
And that model is
what we're trying
to overcome with a lot
of our Chopra Foundation.
And now the work at
UCSD is to package these
all back together
into this whole system
because when you
practice them together,
the effects are not just
mathematically additive,
they're exponential,
and it's cumulative.
The whole is greater than the
sum of the parts, this idea.
That's why health
systems are so powerful.
>> Yeah, and that, I think,
speaks to the word integrative.
When I hear the
word integrative,
I really feel that--
let's say you're a carpenter
and you have a bunch of tools.
And one tool might be
meditation, if you will,
metaphorically.
Another one would
be these mantras.
Another one would be,
let's say, the diet.
But to you, the
integrative-- that word--
mean as the witness
or the observer,
we have these tools
at our disposal.
But there's a way that we
need to understand which
tool is right for the moment.
And is that where the guide
comes in, or the guru?
>> Historically that's correct.
So we're trying to get some of
our western medical teachers
and physicians to
learn more that role.
And at UCSD, we
have consultations
from people from
traditional systems.
So we have what's called the
Pacific College of Oriental
Medicine in San Diego.
And we have teachers
from their college
come and give lectures
to us at UC San
Diego, and our
public health system
students and the integrative
medicine students.
And we have people
coming in from Ayureda.
So we're cross-seeding
these traditions,
trying to transform at least
the western model at San Diego.
And other people are trying
that, too, at other, say,
academic hospital
systems in the US.
>> Your definition of
non-dual awareness.
What would that be?
>> I'd say the best
definition is oneness.
So non-duality as
a word literally
means not two, or
not more than two.
So the opposite of
that is oneness.
So non-duality is
a term currently
pretty common and
popular in the,
say, more the esoteric aspects
of wellness here in the US.
There's an entire group called
Science and Non-Duality, SANDS,
and they host an
annual conference,
and there's books on this.
But it really refers to a
human coming into the awareness
of the oneness of awareness.
So what's the opposite of that?
The opposite of that is duality.
The opposite of
that is separation.
And most people do
perceive separation.
Most people feel they're
living in the mind body,
sometimes often here,
and that they're living
and they're projecting
out into the world.
And so I'm here, you're there.
The wall's there, the
mountain's there, and so forth.
They're separate from.
But the reality is that that is
an illusion that unfortunately
exists.
But perhaps there's reason
for it in play or display
of creation.
But the point is that it's
possible for a human being
to overcome that
illusion of duality
and come back into the ongoing
experience of the oneness
of everything, so that no
longer am I perceived separately
from you.
You are me.
That wall is me.
The universe itself is myself.
It's all my own self.
It's all my own
home, and I'm here
living the life that
unfolds before me.
>> That's beautiful.
And that's also--
I wouldn't say it's the
easiest thing to live by.
And I'm sure it's
a roller coaster.
You can get into these
moments of non-dual awareness
and then whatever, go
home to visit your family,
and then it's all
out the window,
and there's that
forgetting, it seems.
>> Initially that can happen.
But ultimately, at
the end of the day,
it's possible for a human
being to come into that state
where that is utterly
and completely permanent.
That oneness of consciousness,
of awareness is not lost.
The unity with all things,
the oneness is not lost.
You're still
perceiving your mind
having thoughts, your
mind having emotions.
But it never takes you
out of the wholeness.
And this is really the
birthright, I would say,
of a human being.
And it's the foundation
of well-being,
getting back to some of
our earlier questions
about what is really
wellness and well-being?
It's being able to live in that.
It is possible, and it happens,
and it's happening every day.
>> So eastern concepts
of self-realization.
Is that the same thing, or fits
into the same understanding?
>> Yeah.
I would say yes.
Self-realization.
There's that term.
You hear terms of enlightenment.
And if you go to
conferences on this,
and people who are into
studying all these books
and philosophies and
different traditions,
they'll be kind of nit picking.
Well, enlightenment means this,
and self-realization actually
means this, and no
self means this.
And there are nuances
within traditions,
depending on, perhaps, how the
own master of that tradition,
or the priest or whoever it was,
came into their realization,
and then they carried
down descriptions
and understandings.
But at the end of the day,
what I'm talking about--
and I think the ideal of
all these traditions--
is coming into the state
of wellness, which is
a kind of unity consciousness.
And I mentioned earlier
the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi,
who brought TM to the west.
He spoke about seven
stages of consciousness,
developing up to what
he called unity and then
Brahmin consciousness.
And unity is a good description
of this notion of non-duality
because we're talking
about a oneness, actually.
And if I were to modify
it a bit, if I can,
I would say more the Brahmin
consciousness is actually
a corresponding term for
this idea of non-duality
because even in unity, it
implies that I as a person
am feeling in union
with that or with you.
But actually, even those
experiences go away.
There's no more separate you
to be in union with everything.
Everything is you.
So that's just the oneness.
And that, I think, is what he
meant by Brahmin consciousness.
>> So we were talking about
contemplative practices.
And I'm assuming that's what
you mean, these practices that
have been around a while.
Meditation, obviously,
yoga, Tai Chi and qigong.
What kind of role
do these practices
play in the path towards
non-dual awareness?
>> I think multiple levels.
You know, as an
integrated package,
all these things help maintain
our health and well-being
of our body, of our psyche.
Meditation and the
practice of yoga
can just foster a
sense of expansiveness,
going beyond just the
ruminating thoughts that
go through many of
our heads endlessly,
going beyond just this belief
that I am these thoughts.
I am this personality.
I am this career I've chosen.
Whatever you can do
to start softening up
that programming
and that belief,
because really, at
the end of the day,
if I were to say what is
responsible for the state
of separation, the
state of duality,
it's because a person
believes that they
are this ego mind that
they're perceiving
through all the time.
They believe they are that,
and that creates separation.
Once you soften that up and
you can let that belief go,
separation disappears.
Duality disappears.
That's the underlying
root cause, really,
the belief that that is
you, when you are this.
>> Here's Deepak Chopra speaking
about the healing benefits
of practices such as
yoga and meditation.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- But now we also have very
interesting research on Yoga
and meditation.
Again, at the Chopra
Center, I think
Paul Mills is somewhere here.
Paul, are you here?
There.
He's the Director of
Research, professor at UCSD
responsible for directing
all the research we do,
coordinating with all
the other centers.
We now know that yoga and
meditation and pranayama
have very specific
effects, primarily,
I think, because of
this vagus nerve.
When you're doing yoga asanas
like Cat Cow or Sun Salutation,
you're simulating
the vagus nerve.
When you're doing
breathing techniques,
you're doing the same.
And so that has a
very specific effect.
In fact, we can
create a whole map
of which nerves,
which visceral nerves,
are specifically stimulated
during the yoga asanas
for which organ in the body.
Pranayama similarly.
There are breathing
techniques that
will increase metabolism,
decrease metabolism, cool you
down, warm you up.
So this is a whole
different way of looking
at our biological organisms.
[END PLAYBACK]
>> That was a nice
shout out to you.
So as far as yoga,
do you practice yoga?
>> Yeah, I learned yoga shortly
after I learned meditation.
>> OK.
What benefit do you feel
you get out of it, truly?
>> From yoga itself?
It helps me maintain a more
relaxed state of my body,
say my body mind.
I have a fairly heavy career
work life, more than 100% job
at the University of California.
And then working with Deepak's
group is maybe another 80%.
I've lost track.
So it's pretty demanding.
And so these kinds
of practices helped
me maintain a good
sense of well-being.
Yeah.
>> Have you looked into to plant
medicines in those practices
and their impact on
well-being and health?
>> OK, a couple
of things on that.
One is regarding the plant
medicines of, say, Peru
and South America,
I'll give a shout out
to Joseph Tafur, MD, who wrote a
book "Fellowship of the River".
He was a postdoctoral
fellow in my group,
and I'm familiar
with what you're
saying because of his
work over the years
traveling down to Peru.
He set up a healing
center there,
and people go
there for pursuing,
say, aspects of well-being
on their journey.
As far as my own
research, it's been mainly
in the context of
the Ayurvedia system.
So the research I've done
with the Chopra Foundation
was looking at Ayurveda
as an entire prescription.
So we would give people
their meditation, their yoga
practice, their herbs, their
stretching practice, lectures,
all in one intensive package.
And we studied how that shifted
them over about a week or so.
And so the herbs are
used within the context
of the whole system,
not so much prescribed
as a separate phenomenon.
And that's some of the research
Deepak was referring to
in the video clip.
>> So I know that, having
actually spent some time with
Dr. Tafur--
not down in the
jungle, but I know him.
Very amazing individual.
And spent time in
the jungle, a lot
of what I come out of
these practices with
is the most beautiful part.
Sometimes even the
sharing circle afterwards
is some of the most
beautiful parts
because you can see the
gratitude inside everyone
as they're sharing
their experience.
And I kind of found
that gratitude
must play such an
integral role in not just
health, but well-being.
So what are your thoughts on
that, that word gratitude?
What does that mean?
>> Gratitude.
There's so much to say about it.
I'll give you some of my
thoughts around it, what it is,
and then I can
share with you some
of the research
we've done, actually,
at the University of
California San Diego.
So what is gratitude?
Some people have described
gratitude as an emotion.
Saint Paul described it in some
of his letters as a virtue.
My experience with gratitude--
so gratitude is a word that
we give to an experience
that we have.
And we have an
experience of energy.
We have an experience of
a change in our awareness
of our consciousness.
What we call
gratitude, for me, that
is the manifestation of love,
moving through this creation,
as we call it.
If a person were to have the
understanding or belief--
and you've heard this, that
love is all there is, actually--
at the end of the day, this
entire creation and everything
beyond it is love itself.
And the creation is the
movement and manifestation
of love in endless,
endless forms.
The manifestation of basic
primal phenomenon of love,
as it comes into a
manifestation, that movement,
that energy is what
we call gratitude.
The energy that we experience,
and we call it gratitude.
And for me, that's why it's
such a transformative practice
because it takes a person
out of that ego consciousness
we were describing earlier,
and it provides an opening.
It's an energy that
does this to a person.
It reduces separation
and boundaries
and it creates connectivity,
which is exactly what you said.
And that gets back to
the idea of community,
which you asked about earlier
as we're on these journeys,
whether it's meditation
or yoga or plant medicine.
Community.
It helps dissolve the
illusion of separation.
>> You'd mentioned the
practice of gratitude.
What does that mean
to you in your life,
and how it can help
people understand
how to put gratitude,
this thing that we're
trying to understand,
into an actual practice
that we can cultivate?
>> So many ways.
And some of the research
we've used at UC San Diego,
we've done journaling.
And so these particular
research projects
we did were in patients
with heart failure.
A lot of my research is in
the field of cardiology.
And we were studying
heart failure patients
along a certain severity
of their diagnosis.
So we did a
randomized trial where
we randomized some of
them to keep a gratitude
journal for eight weeks.
And the other patients were
randomized to usual care,
whatever that was, some drugs
and special diet and so forth.
And we tracked what happened
to these patients just
from eight weeks of
keeping a journal.
And we gave them
these pretty journals.
We said, here.
Most days of the week, write
down two or three things
that you're grateful for.
You can write two words.
You can write two
pages, 20 pages.
And many did all those
things because we collected
the journals at
the end of the day,
and we're actually looking
at the content now.
But what we found was amazing.
Certainly the trait of
gratitude went up in those
because they were
thinking about it.
We call it you're shifting
to an attitude of gratitude
when you spend
time looking at it.
The depressed mood went down.
Their cardiac functioning,
which is a key to heart failure
itself and maintaining
health, improved
while they were journaling.
Also, most
cardiovascular diseases
have a fairly heavy
inflammatory burden.
And you can measure
this in the blood
by looking at biomarkers
such as CRP or B type
natriuretic peptide,
interleukin 6, things like this.
Those biomarkers, as a
panel, dropped about 23%
just over those two months
while they were journaling.
If we looked at the patients
that didn't journal,
they just stick with
the normal therapy,
they had no change at all.
So gratitude is an
incredibly powerful practice,
not only for the mind and the
sense of spiritual nature,
but just the
physical body itself.
>> I want to get back to that.
You said-- let me see
if I got this right.
There's an
anti-inflammatory component,
it seems, to gratitude,
to a state of being.
And you've actually noticed
that it's while journaling?
Or how do people tap into this,
because this is incredible?
Anti-inflammatory,
understanding now
that a lot of even
autoimmune disease
might have come from chronic
inflammation in the gut.
And more than just autoimmune.
But so this is very important
in healing. s And gratitude
itself actually has that much
of an impact on the body.
>> So most people-- and often
in depression and in heart
failure, there's depressed mood.
It's partly from the
inflammation load,
but part of it's just carrying
around a diagnosis that's
not so promising
potentially, depending
how well you're able to
adhere to the therapeutic
recommendations.
So these things are
kind of stressors,
and stressors create separation.
Like depression
creates separation.
When a person is
depressed, they're
kind of like this, and
the world's something
foreign and awful and
there's no happiness.
And the gratitude,
I think, works
to reduce the inflammation
and reduce the stress
because it helps you reconnect.
That's our normal
state, connectedness.
We're social beings, after all.
And so when we're more
socialized and connected,
I think our body just
naturally relaxes,
and our psyche as well.
And we draw all the nourishment
from it, probably, too.
>> Dr. Joe DiSpenza has done
a great deal of research
into the effects of elevated
emotions such as gratitude
on healing and well-being.
Here he is on
Gaia's "Open Minds".
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- I think that you and I have
been hypnotized and conditioned
into believing we need
a reason to give thanks.
We wait for something
outside of us
to change how we
feel inside of us.
And the moment, we feel
differently inside of us,
we acknowledge whatever
it was outside of us.
That's how gratitude works.
The event happens, and
you give gratitude.
But if you think about
the emotional signature
of gratitude, gratitude means
the event has already happened,
or it's happening to you.
So when you begin to
marry a clear intention,
you rehearse what your
future is going to be like,
you can change the
circuitry in your brain
to look like the event
has already occurred.
That's what neuroscience says.
That's what mental
rehearsal does.
So now your brain is no
longer a record of the past.
Now it's a map to the future.
If you marry that rehearsal
of a clear intention,
and you review your
behaviors and your choices
and you review
those experiences,
and you're intent
on that, but then
you marry it with the
elevated emotion of gratitude,
your body, as the
unconscious mind,
believes that the event
has already occurred.
And you're signaling
new genes in new ways
because to your body,
it already happened.
- Yes.
- So the materialists will
wait for their healing
to happen and give gratitude.
We say the quantum mind already
experienced the healing.
So we don't get up
from our meditations,
or praying that our
prayers are answered.
We get up from our meditations
as if our prayers are already
answered.
- Yes.
- And that absolute
state of being,
where mind body are like that,
if you practice that every day,
it will begin to
become familiar to you.
You'll be able to turn it
on in a matter of seconds.
And so then when you have--
and we've seen this on so
many of our brain scans
in all of our students.
- And you have many
of them in here
with the stories that
go along with the scans.
- But one of the cool things
that happens in our workshops
is we're capturing
amplitudes of energy
in people's brains that
are 10 times, 20 times,
30 times normal, which means
the inner experience is greater
than any past experience.
And that's the moment the
rewriting the program.
That's the field moving
through their body.
through their nervous system.
And we're capturing
that in real time.
They can't make that happen.
You can't say to the person,
make your brain do that.
It's happening to them.
And when it happens to
them to such a degree,
the inner experience
becoming more
real than any past experience
is a moment I'll never forget.
And that's the moment the
circuits in their brain
are rewritten, and
that's the moment
the energy and the
emotion is greater
than the past experience.
And that's the moment the
body responds to a new mind.
[END PLAYBACK]
>> Pretty interesting
take on that.
So what are your thoughts
on that explanation?
>> Couple things.
That was fabulous.
I didn't know he was doing
such in-depth research
on these topics.
And I appreciate
what he's doing,
and the description of the
transformation for the people.
A couple of things.
I think, in part,
it's semantics.
Some people have
differentiated gratitude
from thankfulness, thankfulness
being an idea that we
receive something from someone.
We're thankful for that.
It's a response to
something that's given
or something that takes place.
And that's how we first
started off that clip.
It's related to gratitude.
But as I see gratitude,
gratitude is-- basically
it's a state of being.
It's something you
live with all the time.
It's not in response
to something someone
gave you or did for you.
It's part of your
soul nature, we
could say, your actual
spiritual essence.
And to carry that around
all the time changes
your perception
of the world, who
you're with, what you're doing.
So I see it as a very
fundamental feature
of our makeup, we could say.
>> What are you working on now?
How are you now
building that bridge
to get this body of
knowledge out to the world?
I know you've been
doing it for a while.
But what are you working
on right now for people?
>> I'm just putting
together a talk.
I mentioned earlier, there's the
Academy of Integrative Health
and Medicine.
And it's an academy that's
been trying to really integrate
into a more holistic way the
biomedical allopathic model
with the whole person
transcendent model.
So I'm going to be giving
a talk on the topic
of integrative health
and non-dual awareness.
So my current focus,
really, is to help
introduce this
concept more and more
into the integrative space, and
try to just soften things up
so this can begin to be
understood a bit more
and have some discussions
because right now in medicine,
things like
self-realization, these
are not concepts that exist.
But I think the
time is ripe for it.
And it might help us transition
to a new level of wellness
and how we look at the
human being in medicine.
>> What do you believe
your greatest contribution
to well-being, to the
world's well-being is?
And what could that
contribution be
if you were able to
put it into some words?
The biggest impact you feel your
work has been able to provide.
>> OK.
So you mentioned
earlier, yes, I've
published a few hundred
scientific papers in lots
of areas-- stress, hypertension,
the psychoneuroimmunology,
stress hormones, all kinds
of behavioral intervention
techniques, so many things.
But I would say the most
important contribution
for me is what I'm
doing right now,
is what we've been
speaking about today,
and what I'll speak at
the AHM Conference on.
I want to help bring into
the conversation of medicine
the transcendent spiritual
nature of the human being.
In ancient societies
such as Greece,
there wasn't a physician
here and a priest here.
They were physician priests.
When we were in Tibet,
most of the monks
are also physicians
because they're
treating the entire integrated
person, from the consciousness
all through whatever the malady,
and joint pain, whatever it is.
So we lost that because
of this reductionist model
that you referred to earlier
when we were chatting.
And so I think that basic
false split of reductionism
in medicine needs to be healed.
And as much as I can
help a little bit
with some of these
type of conversations,
then I'll feel fulfilled.
>> OK.
Do you have any
concepts or ideas
of what your future
work might bring
to start bringing together
the transcendental aspects,
basically, of your whole person?
Even if it's just a
hope for something
that you would like to
build in the face of,
I don't know, booming technology
and interconnectedness
between people.
What are your thoughts?
>> So some of the work
we're doing with the Chopra
Foundation on
Ayurvedic medicine,
we're going to continue that.
And that's been
whole person medicine
from the Ayurvedic
point of view.
And we're able to show
that when people delve
into these practices
and programs,
it begins to cultivate a
sense of non-verbal awareness
automatically.
It automatically
helps support them
able to begin to move away
from this egoic role identity
and move into a sense
of connectedness.
So I want to continue
that work because it
can have an impact on the
scientific literature and maybe
how things are going.
So that's a big piece for me.
>> Do you think now, with the
advent of the internet and how
connected we are today, this
is part of integrative medicine
for, maybe, the world?
People are now being switched
on to ideas that, in the past,
it was only the
literate and only,
let's say, a rare few that
were able to even come
into contact with
some of these concepts
that you're speaking about?
Do you feel like
the time is ripe now
for integrative medicine?
>> I do.
I do.
And I appreciate
what you're saying
about the web, and
the advancement
and the dissemination
of knowledge.
I'm beginning to learn more
and more about the capabilities
there.
Certainly Deepak has been
utilizing it very well
for many, many years,
disseminating his ideas
and knowledge.
So if we can continue to
use that platform for that.
What you're saying,
technology, reminds me earlier
we spoke of the biofield.
And if somebody can
come up with the idea
or fund an intensive research
program to develop a technology
to visualize this.
We have x-rays.
We have FMRIs.
We don't have anything
yet for the biofield.
And that will be a
fundamental game changer.
So we're also working
with some people on that.
>> OK.
This might be a
little left of center,
but since we're speaking about
technology, the internet, most
people, their connection with
it is hunched over in a chair,
hands literally
touching a computer
with this energetic field
around it, with a lot of EMFs.
So when we're speaking
about health in particular,
do you have any concepts on,
maybe, how-- because I know
you said you've gotten
into glyphosates
and those types of things.
But as far as EMFs and
technology, as great as great
as it is that we are being
connected with people
around the world
in real time, there
is still the very real
sedentary lifestyle, and also
constantly hands-on technology.
There's, I think, a quintillion
times more EMFs present today
than our grandparents
had to experience.
So what are your
thoughts, maybe concerns,
revolving around this great
advent of the internet,
but the technologies
that our bodies are now
having to somehow adapt to?
>> Yeah.
So a couple of things.
One on the posture side.
So at UC San Diego, we have a
division of behavioral medicine
of which I'm the chief of.
And there are many faculty
within that system working
on this.
And they just do research
showing on how adverse it is,
and they provide
specific recommendations
of what to do if you're
at your computer too long.
And get up and take a
walk, certain stretches.
So they've been working
actively on that side,
just the mechanics, let's say.
On the side of the EMFs,
it's not an area of research,
but I do have concerns.
I read articles by people who
are delving into this more.
I know that--did you
just mention the 5G,
or was I just thinking about it?
But that's on its way in,
>> That's being rolled
out at an incredible pace.
And yes, that is something
we need to at least consider
among all these things.
>> So a big player in all
that is Qualcomm Corporation.
They're based in San Diego.
I was at a party, dinner
party, maybe a year and a half
ago, speaking to one
of their engineers.
And he was telling me
that we're so excited.
We almost have the five G set.
We're going to be
rolling this out,
and it's going to
transform how fast you can
watch your movies and all this.
And I said, in your
research programs,
do you study how it
influences human beings,
whether it's inflammatory
peptides or their mood or--
he said no.
No, we can't do that.
We need to get
this on the market.
That's the role.
So this reminds me,
back to the glyphosate,
there's so many
pieces from industry,
whether it's the ag industry
or the electronics industry.
They're not vetting
these technologies
for our health and well-being.
The only thing we
have close to that
is the pharmaceutical
industries,
which I've worked in as
far as doing research
on, say, anti-hypertensive
drugs and these sorts of things.
They're at least
vetted in human beings.
It starts with animals,
moves through humans,
clinical trials, phases 1, 2, 3.
And then they're prescribed.
And they're prescribed with
the knowledge that look,
this is going to lower
your blood pressure,
but it also might make you
depressed once in a while.
Your choice, but you
know the adverse effects.
We have not had
that in the field
of agriculture and herbicides.
We have not had that
in the field of EMFs,
and probably other technologies
I don't even know about.
I believe there
are consequences.
But I don't have
hard data on it.
>> Right.
And so in telecommunications
companies, it's huge.
In respect to big ag, big
pharma, telecommunications,
it's huge.
And I totally agree.
And when we're talking
about integrative,
so we're talking about
the whole person.
But the whole person--
can we even look
at the whole person
if we're not looking
at the environment
that we're involved in?
And what are these
technologies and glyphosates
and all these things also doing
to the environment around us?
I've heard many
things as far as trees
in Holland, old trees being
wiped out because they're
disrupting the 5G and
other issues such as even
migration patterns of birds.
And some of it is
too new to really
put the stamp of evidence on.
But I guess the question
to you is, then,
when we're looking
at the whole person,
to wrap this whole
conversation up,
can we really even
understand the whole person
without understanding
the environment
that they're swimming in?
>> So first of all,
Ben, I really appreciate
your perspective coming
back to the big picture,
big picture in the environment.
So thank you for that.
And my answer is no.
We can't really consider
the whole person.
Some of Deepak's lectures
from a couple of years
ago, he was emphasizing that
our bodies don't end here.
Certainly we have the
biofield saying maybe
they end out about
three or four feet.
But the environment itself, the
air, the water, the trees, all
of this is our own
body environment.
And to the degree that we're
not nurturing and cultivating
the health and
well-being of all that,
then we cannot be fully healthy
and of total well-being as we
would want.
So I hope you and your
show, as it unfolds,
can begin to have some of these
conversations of what's really
going on in the
environment, and how
we as people who live
in it, whether it's
the EMFs or other herbicides,
we can raise awareness
and we can find out how to
protect ourselves where needed.
>> Beautiful.
Thank you for that.
If you were to leave our
audience with just one
piece of advice
to help them even
just in their journey
towards understanding
health, well-being,
if you had to leave
with some kind of lasting words
of wisdom, what would that be?
>> I would say just to know that
you are more than you believe
yourself to be.
And follow whatever impulses,
whether it's some friend
recommends this book,
or a conversation here.
But keep yourself open to
conversations and sources
of information that
might help you provide
a step along this journey of
unfolding that a little bit
more, and then a
little bit more.
So this reminds me of your
show on the limitless,
and those episodes where
you're encouraging people
to take a step.
Cross this threshold that
you don't think you can.
And once you've crossed
it and you're comfortable,
cross the next one.
Stay open because
we are so much more
than we know ourselves to be
and is capable to know that.
>> That's very true.
Paul, thank you so much for
joining us on the show today.
>> Thank you for having me, Ben.
Really enjoyed
our time together.
Thank you.
>> Dr. Mills' approach to
healing is truly a holistic
one.
With a body of extensive
research about the importance
of considering the
whole spiritual person,
his ideas are truly profound.
I'm Ben Stuart, and I want
to thank you for joining us
on "Healing Matrix".
[MUSIC PLAYING]